
Kat Golubev 
11766190  
Media and Information 
Literary Analysis
R. Glitz

Those Times...: Anne Sexton and the Traumatic Female Childhood

“Women are born with pain built in. It’s our physical destiny. Period pains, sore boobs, childbirth, you know. We carry it within ourselves, throughout our lives. Men don’t. They have to seek it out. They invent all these gods and demons and things just so they can feel guilty about things which is something we do very well on our own. Then they create wars so they can feel things and touch each other and when there aren’t any wars, they can play rugby... and we have it all going on in here, inside.”

("Episode 3." Fleabag)

Anne Sexton (1928 - 1974) , known as the ‘High Priestess’ of confessional poetry (Gill 425), is a poet who has garnered a reputation for unflinchingly exploring her own internal anguish and mental illness through confessional poetry with a “delineation of femaleness so fanatical that it makes one wonder... what a woman is” (Van Duyn 431). Her poetry, while being generally controversial, has been particularly divisive across gender lines with critics such as James Dickey commenting that “it would be hard to find a writer who dwells more insistently on the pathetic and disgusting aspects of bodily experience” (Stein, “Millennial Days”).

While this remains a running theme throughout Sexton’s work, it becomes particularly effective in exploring the corporeal discomfort and psychological horror of childhood which is often obscured in literary accounts that favor the Romantic ‘age of innocence’ narrative of youth. The poem Those Times... (Sexton 118) broaches the subject of childhood trauma through a decidedly psychoanalytical and gynocentric lens, establishing various conflicting dichotomies through the evocative imagery mined from the poet’s memories. Considering the fact that psychoanalysis, at its inception, was based on the juxtaposition of the two genders (the masculine as active and rational, the feminine as passive and hysterical) (Waters 105), as well as research which has demonstrated the developmental differences between girls and boys, the text offers viscerally affective insights into the female psyche through the literary medium.

The first of these dichotomies is set up between confinement and growth. In the poem, Sexton remembers herself, at six years old, being exiled in her room “behind a gate” (118) in a “graveyard full of dolls”(118), which acts as the literal as well as the psychological setting of the text. Girls have been historically expected to be less boisterous than boys, often being praised for their reserved demeanor. However, within this confined space, Sexton’s childhood is not marked by exploration, wonder or naiveté, but by avoidance (“avoiding myself” (118), “avoiding the precious window” (120) and “avoiding the wallpaper of the room”(120)). The body, the outside world and the yonic imagery of the roses, which transform into “tongues bloomed over and over”(120) later in the text prove to be too repulsive and intimidating for the young girl to handle. Sexton’s description of further confining herself by seeking refuge in the closet (“as one hides in a tree”) (119) and growing “into it like a root”(120) , evokes an attempt at constructing an artificial womb to further shield herself from the disturbing outside. Inside the closet, however, Sexton recalls how she “planned such plans of flight”(120), her dreams of growth “storing their energy like a bull”(120). Using terminology which precedes Butler’s performative theory of gender, Sexton writes of how she rehearsed her life and choreographed her womanhood among shoes which she knew she would one day outgrow. According to psychiatric research, girls are quicker at developing physiologically, anatomically and mentally, which means that they become aware of themselves and others at an earlier stage (Tiffin 47). This heightened awareness of the self and external expectations leads to an inability to detach from the pervasive representations of womanhood to which she cannot live up to, forcing her into an escapist fantasy of the future.

The juxtaposition of the natural and artificial is also used to demonstrate early childhood understanding of the world. Throughout the text, Sexton expresses a clear preference towards the man-made over the natural and corporeal. The outside world beyond the window, which itself is referred to as an “ugly eye” (120), is perceived by her as exhausted and diseased. The coughing birds which are ‘chained to the heaving trees’ are burdened by their own existence and, while being experienced through a 6 year olds’ perspective, are a far cry from the wonder and curiosity one would expect from a child. The closet, which Sexton compares to a tree, is revealed to be far more enticing than an actual tree and despite herself dreaming of “flight” (120) and ascension (“like an elevator”)(120), Sexton pathologizes the birds outside of her window, stripping them of all their conventional connotations of freedom and clearly separating her desires from their reality.

Throughout the poem, Sexton’s agency is shown most explicitly in her ambivalent relationship towards the dolls. She vacillates from stepping on their noses to “kissing their little imaginary mouths” (119) but never confuses them with real people nor expresses any concrete feelings towards them. It is implied that she envies the dolls which are “so perfectly put together” (119), created “without the pang of birth”(119) as opposed to her own body which “grew unsurely”(119). Once again, the societal expectations placed on women is shown to elevate perfection over nature, a point which is still prevalent in feminist discourse today.

The desire for nonexistence, or at the very least of an inanimate existence, is further expressed in the developing image of the body throughout the poem. Sexton describes her bones as “those pieces of sculpture”(121) and her future children as “two monuments”(121), finding strength and beauty through re-objectification rather than vitality. Even her “small dignity”(121) is not experienced as something innate but rather as something to be hoarded, a thing which she yearns to retain and is afraid to lose.

The physical body is established as a source of insecurity and shame, as well as a burden, one that she imagines ‘dragging’ along when she finally takes flight. It is described as “the suspect in its grotesque house” (118), presumed guilty and subjected to “nightly humiliations”(118) of being undressed and “examined for flaws”(121). This kind of early childhood trauma remains widespread among women and has been linked to a dissociation from the body, often leading to dysmorphic and self-harming tendencies in the future (Scheffers 7).

These “little childhood cruelties”(118), as Sexton describes, are rooted in the experience of a lack of control and autonomy over her person and what she perceived as the transactional nature of her existence: she resigns herself to being “the last given”(118), “the last taken”(118), “the mistake that Mother used to keep Father from his divorce”(118). The capitalization of the two parents signifies an understanding of them not only as people but as archetypal figures, as per Jungian psychology, who loom large in her subconscious. The image of self is thus shown to be dependent upon figures of authority. Sexton’s repetition of “the me who...” (119) is both personal and alienating, emphasizing a disembodied attachment to herself as an entity, an expression of herself as “the unwanted”(118), “the mistake” (118), “the exile”(118); an identity which she settled upon as a result of the systematic dismissal of her needs and desires.

Throughout the poem, Sexton repeats that she “did not question”(119) her predicament, writing how she “lay there silently”(121) each night while being examined. Throughout the last third of the poem, in which Sexton writes of the things which she did not know in her childhood (“I did not know the woman I would be”(121)), there is still an overwhelming sense of passivity. The blood blooms in her “each month like an exotic flower”(121), remaining foreign and somewhat alien, just like the wallpaper in her room. Her children “break from between [my] legs” (121) seemingly on their own accord. Sexton writes, “my life, in the end, would run over my mother’s like a truck”(121), an inarguably powerful image but still notably devoid of any intention, as if her life were speeding down a highway with no one at the wheel. Sexton’s final lines show a resignation and acceptance of her traumatic past: “and all that would remain/from the year I was six /was a small hole in my heart, a deaf spot,/so that I might hear/the unsaid more clearly”(121). In Freudian psychology, the heart is associated with women while the mind is associated with men so this once again reinforces the gendered experience, although this theory has become somewhat stale with time. In a way, this conclusion is universal, the equivalent of the well-worn adage which reassures us that our experiences, no matter how painful, have made us into the people we are now. However, in doing so, Sexton once again reminds us that our childhood always remains with us, leaving permanent scars and traumas that can never truly heal, leaving each of us slightly disabled by our past.

Works Cited

"Episode 3." Fleabag. BBC Three. 18 Mar. 2019. Television  
Gill, Jo. “Anne Sexton and Confessional Poetics.” The Review of English Studies, vol. 55, no.

220, 2004, pp. 425–45, doi:10.1093/res/55.220.425.  
Scheffers, Mia, et al. “Negative Body Experience in Women with Early Childhood Trauma:

Associations with Trauma Severity and Dissociation.” European Journal of Psychotraumatology, vol. 8, no. 1, Taylor & Francis, 2017, p. 1322892, doi:10.1080/20008198.2017.1322892.

Sexton, A., and M. Kumin. The Complete Poems. Houghton Mifflin, 1999, https://books.google.ru/books?id=1ZzEOlBW0EsC.

Stein, Leigh. “Millennial Days.” The New York Times, 25 Mar. 2016. NYTimes.com, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/27/books/review/millennial-days.html.

Tiffin, J., et al. The Psychology of Normal People. D.C. Heath & Company, 1946, https://books.google.ru/books?id=194vAAAAYAAJ.

Van Duyn, Mona. “Seven Women.” Poetry, vol. 115, no. 6, 1970, pp. 430–439. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/20599335. Accessed 1 Feb. 2021

Waters, Melanie Jane. ’Those Times’ : Politics, Culture and Confession in the Poetry of Anne Sexton. Newcastle University, 2008. theses.ncl.ac.uk, http://theses.ncl.ac.uk/jspui/handle/10443/261.
