
BOOK REVIEW

The Best of Helmut Newton Selections from his Photographic Work 
4th edition
Felix Zdenek  
Schirmer/Mosel, 2004  
156 pp, 105 color and duotone plates (paperback)
ISBN 3888146356 

Reviewed by Kat Golubev

The 4th edition exhibition catalogue of Helmut Newton’s retrospective, which traveled around Europe in 1993, presents the legendary photographer’s works in all their suspenseful serenity. Newton’s unmistakable black and white fashion photographs, nudes and portraits are all represented throughout the book as separate, intertwined oeuvres which collectively re-construct the photographer’s meticulous gaze. With short introductory essays by Noemi Smolek and Urs Stahel which discuss Newton’s transcendence of fashion photography as well as his fetishistic staples and meta-voyeurism, the catalogue wastes no time in attending to Newton’s works which span the course of four decades, from the 1960’s to the 1990’s. While stills from the same series are showcased side-by-side, the catalogue makes no attempt at chronology: the spreads are mostly unified through their subjects’ essence or ‘mystique’, the erotic quality which Newton so masterfully captures. Yet, despite this laissez-faire temporality, one rarely feels the passage or reversal of time. The bodies, and settings, are presented as timeless, removed from the grips and prophecies of history. Newton, who spent the second half of his life between Monte Carlo and Los Angeles, merges European decadence and Americana in a dizzying whirlwind of settings, yet the image always remains bound to the subject, implicitly demoting cultural heritage to a rich, textural backdrop for corporeal beauty. In an image entitled Lisa fleeing (1974) shot in Key Biscayne, Florida, a young woman in pink translucent tulle can be seen walking away from the glaring lights of the motel behind her, fearful. The setting is gritty and blurred, the suspense of the photograph exuding from the juxtaposition, the push and pull of the figure and the setting. In more sympathetic portraits, like those of Xavier Moreau in a pool (1979) or Francoise Sagan looking out the window of an automobile which almost completely engulfs her (1963), the subjects’ bodies are extended out through their surroundings, which inevitably bring the viewer’s eyes back to their origins through the angular perspective.

A large portion of the catalogue is dominated by Newton’s nudes, which do not speak, but rather compel. The figures he captures may be, in Smolek’s description, threatening in their otherness, but perhaps it is because they are so secure in their power. It is not a superficial empowerment which Newton evokes: every muscle, every curvature of the body asserts its dominance in the image. At times the lens and the figure’s eyes are locked in stalemate, the power of the gaze suspended in the space between them, a unified symbiosis of voyeur and exhibitor. Throughout these works, Newton captures both movement and stillness; the body-in-space and the body-autonomous, at ease and tension, in their lively interaction and profound concreteness. The figures which are at once palpably present are often also inexplicably alienated. Sprawling across lavish mise-en-scenes or surrounded by gritty urbanism, they are never fully ‘in’ or ‘out’ of place. The dramatic lighting, which became one of Newton’s artistic signatures, becomes a force of its own, reckoning with photography's primary function and logic. It is through light that Newton envelops and reveals the figures, every highlight and shadow serving its emergent purpose.

As noted in the introduction, Newton wholly disregards fashion in favor of the body, a sentiment which can be traced back to his images for British Vogue which catapulted him to notoriety. The bodies, even covered, are always there, always nude and it is this multiplicity of nude forms, which under Newton’s gaze do not regress to a state of vulnerability or innocence, that are provocative insofar as they are striking yet unpretentious. The body, in Newton’s work, is irreducible and uncompromising, the fashion always remains secondary to its form.

In his photographs of cultural icons such as Liz Taylor in the swimming pool (1985), David Lynch with Isabella Rossellini (1992), and Salvador Dali on an IV drip (1986), Newton never fails to go beyond the veneer of celebrity and false modesty to capture the essence of their charismatic core. The cover image, Jodi Foster reclining, her breast partially exposed (1987), imbues the young actress with a gravitas far beyond her years.

Newton’s more macabre works which are placed at the end of the catalogue, such as his close-up images of dolls with exposed organs and Crocodile eating ballerina (1983), Newton uses the same techniques to give form to violence and death. Horror, in Newton’s depiction, is senseless in a literal sense, it is tragedy completely void of sentimentality, shown solely through the interplay of textures with light, jarring but not disorienting.
