[MAD GENIUS & ITS DISCONTENTS.md](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/23402613/MAD.GENIUS.ITS.DISCONTENTS.md)[Uploading MAD GENIUS & ITS DISCONTENTS.md
Kat Golubev  
The Mad Genius Debate May 27, 2021

The ‘Mad Genius’ and its Discontents

The connection between ‘madness’ and ‘creation’ can be traced back as far as Plato, Socrates and the Dionysian traditions of ancient Greece. As a myth, it has retained its affective and romantic power until the present day, despite the seismic shifts in the way that modern society conceptualizes ‘madness’.

The ‘mad genius’ exists somewhere between cultural archetype and psychiatric subject, an entity formed and interrogated on the basis of a perceived link between creativity and insanity, in both its functional and theoretical implications. While the ‘mad genius’ can also be applicable in disciplines characterized by obsessive perfectionism such as mathematics or the sciences, which scholars like Rothenberg have linked to schizophrenia, the cultural mythology of mental illness in relation to ‘genius’ is mostly associated with the arts.

While many great artists have indeed been outsiders, unable to integrate with society-at-large, many current studies are attempting to diagnose and pathologize this through psychiatric norms. While the creative process may share qualities with disordered mental processes and therapeutic practices, creative sublimation stands apart from purely psychological forces. The antagonism between artist and society is necessary for the continued development of culture, with a core tension which exerts force and guides the swinging pendulum. The implications of establishing a correlation are therefore highly problematic, potentially challenging the autonomy of art through extensive psychologization.

When looking at the cultural narrative, however, the two are almost inextricably linked; artists, writers, and musicians hardly have a reputation of being ‘stable’, in many ways adding to their mystique and marketability. The martyrs of art, individuals who destroyed themselves in their quest to capture the elusive ‘muse’, are often the brightest examples, with their ‘insanity’ becoming its own subject of fascination.

It is, however, important to note the contradictions which plague the notion of the ‘mad genius’ and discourses surrounding it: ‘genius’ implies something transcendent of time, rules and bounds while also being ‘reality-oriented’ while ‘madness’ implies an inability to think or act in an ‘appropriate’ manner. How something or someone can be recognized as both ‘mad’ and ‘genius’ at the same time is a testament to the counterintuitive ways in which society can function, and the ambiguous yet undeniable role which art has played in the civilizing process. The ‘mad genius’ therefore, should theoretically be a composite entity: one that bears the criteria for madness and the requirements for genius separately. However, those two qualities can only be divorced from one

another if we consider patterns of mental illness and patterns of creative production as discrete cycles which may intersect in time but are not mutually dependent upon one another. This poses a problem for creative production which has been attributed directly to madness or ‘divine madness’, in cases where one is seemingly not possible without the other. Insanity, to some degree, is accepted as a price of admission, both a gift and a curse, coveted and feared, and highly predictive of an individual’s creative potential not because all artists are ‘crazy’ but because of the over-representation and publicization of the highly eccentric in artistic domains.

While the myth’s pervasiveness is undeniable, specifics are hard to come by. Psychiatry only truly found its footing over the course of the 20th century and the ever-changing diagnostic criteria make the attempts at diagnosing high-calibre artists seem like a practice of glamorizing psychological disorders which are ‘en vogue’ at one time or other rather than empirical investigations of the ‘creative psyche’. Schizophrenia transforms into bipolar disorder, mood disorders are substituted for personality disorders, and so on and so forth.

Another issue which should be considered is the mounting evidence of coexisting mental illnesses, or ‘comorbidities’. While it may be difficult to determine causality, it is not difficult to imagine that an artistic sensibility is in some way related to a certain heightened sensitivity to the external and internal world, leading to an individual with a creative temperament exhibiting symptoms of depression, anxiety, mood swings, etc more readily than the average person. Comorbidities demonstrate the complexity of the mind and, along with the increasing pragmatic focus on managing symptoms through therapeutic and pharmaceutical means, the efforts at reaching into the past and diagnosing ‘geniuses’ in any clinical sense seem futile and redundant. While the vocabulary of mental illness may prove useful in describing certain aspects, artworks or even character traits, claiming that these interpretations hold any significant scientific weight seems to overstep the bounds of both artistic criticism and psychiatry.

However, when looking at recent developments, there are emerging concepts, such as ‘neurodiversity’, which may be able to bridge this gap. The term, coined by Judy Singer, a sociologist on the autism spectrum, posits that differences in the brain are not deficits and could actually prove to be advantageous in some areas of life. This suspension of conservative visions of ‘normality’ along with the increased visibility of modern day ‘geniuses’ who have publicized their diagnoses, such as Elon Musk revealing he has Asperger’s syndrome on SNL or Kanye West releasing an album entitled I Hate Being Bipolar, It’s Awesome, could leverage the ‘mad genius’ myth towards significantly reducing the stigma which surrounds mental illness, especially at a time when more people are being diagnosed than ever before. Nevertheless, neurodiversity’s strength as a concept derives from its breadth, which means that it does fairly little in terms of tracing specific artistic inspiration to any particular pathologies.

Thus, the ‘genius’ remains elusive, as it always has, given that it is a construct not only determined by an individual’s innate qualities but also of the social context in which they find themselves and the impact which they have. Both the genius and the madman threaten existing power structures and sometimes even the basic tenets of conventional reality. As such, it is easy to see why they have been so intertwined. The concepts ying-yang around each other, with a drop of the madman in every genius and, perhaps controversially, vice versa. ‘Genius’ and ‘madness’ seem bound to exist on the fringes of society as a cultural counterbalance to one another: the former impossible to quantify, the latter impossible to cure. Perhaps, then, the tipping of the scale is a matter of the will of the genius overcoming, or soothing, the rage of the madman within.…]()
