
Kat Golubev (11766190) 

Thomas Malato (11809604) 

Digital Practices

Assignment B2 Podcasting

The Astral Project - https://soundcloud.com/kng-01-01/astral-project-gol_mal-ep

The podcast episode which we produced aims to bring the podcasting medium itself to the forefront by exploring the medium’s potentialities and limitations. Thematically, the podcast is centred around the ideas of authenticity and intimacy which are prominent in the discourse surrounding the medium. However, formally, the episode experiments and plays with the different aural conventions of podcasting and its predecessors in an attempt to create something that is both immersive and disruptive. The ‘conversation’, which is often lauded as the most relatable and endearing aspect of podcasting, is scripted, acting like a kind of Socratic dialogue between the two personas. Yet, the views expressed are unstable and often contradicting in an attempt to show authenticity as a fluid process rather than a singular commodity. The episode is split into 5 interrelated segments: there is the introduction, the conversation, the ‘sponsorship’, the ‘guest’, the quasi-political expression of views and the outro. Each segment is supposed to simultaneously demonstrate and subvert an aspect of podcasting, ranging from its performative and commercial dimensions to its potential as an ideological vehicle. The episode often cycles back to techno-cultural themes such as alienation and post-truth, which, in our view, are particularly poignant considering podcasting’s status as an ‘intimate’ medium. Furthermore, the episode attempts to remain self-aware while also being admittedly theatrical, a balance which might seem counterintuitive but works to emphasize the medium’s storytelling capacity. The additional characters serve several functions. The automated voice of the ‘all-knowing’ is used to bring attention to the distinct human qualities of the other voices by contrast, as well as to explore the hybridity of the medium; a cyborg podcast, if you will. Meanwhile the character of Stacy pays homage to podcasting’s talk radio predecessor and adds a new dimension in terms of personality and co-presence. Finally, the ‘fresh’ data commercial references the first weeks of the course and plays on the well-worn wisdom of media studies ( ‘raw data is an oxymoron’) as well as acknowledging the pervasive reality of big data.

The literature which informed this episode was taken from week 6 which focused on the different formal, socio-cultural and affective aspects of podcasting. Sienkiwicz and Jaramillo’s text ​Podcasting, the intimate self, and the public sphere (2019), ​laid the basis for viewing podcasting as a ‘disembodied mode of discourse’ with radical potential while also pointing towards the medium’s capacity to obscure political and structural issues due to its intimate and affective appeal. This tension between personal identity, publicity and truth is one of the things we wanted to examine and explore with our episode.

Furthermore, Llinares’ et al’s text, ​Introduction: Podcasting and Podcasts—Parameters of a New Aural Culture (2018)​ also provided us with many insights into some of the ways which the medium allows for freedom and experimentation due to its hybridization of various elements from new and old media alike. The introduction of our podcast, although played as a joke, makes reference to the self-reflexivity of the medium which is discussed in the text and the entire episode can be seen as an exploration of the bounds of this ‘new aural culture’ using various forms of storytelling, such as audio dramaturgy and sampling, which were also mentioned.

Of course, the interview with Linda Duits also served as inspiration for creating a podcast about podcasting in an effort to bring attention to the medium’s eccentricities and create a meta-narrative of the medium within the episode itself.

Works Cited

Sienkiewicz, Matt & Jaramillo, Deborah L. (2019) Podcasting, the intimate self, and the public sphere, Popular Communication, 17:4, 268-272, DOI: 10.1080/15405702.2019.1667997

Llinares, Dario & Fox, Neil & Berry, Richard. (2018). Introduction: Podcasting and Podcasts—Parameters of a New Aural Culture: New Aural Cultures and Digital Media. 10.1007/978-3-319-90056-8_1.

Reflection Kat

The process of podcasting production turned out to be a lot more difficult than I had expected. From the many challenges which we faced in achieving clear and listenable audio files to assembling all those elements in a coherent and immersive soundscape, this episode was by no means easy to produce. This was in part due to the fact that we decided on a more theatrical approach rather than a straightforward conversation which meant that a lot of time was spent developing the concept. Yet, I still stand by this decision because I think it makes the episode more entertaining and fun to listen to. The directness of sound and the intimacy of the voice make podcasting a delicate practice. It is extremely engaging when done well, but any disturbance on the technical front can be jarring and cause the listener to experience

dissonance. Since neither one of us had many technical skills, it was quite a steep learning curve but I do feel that I learned valuable structuring and editing skills throughout this process. Of course, I would have preferred to use better equipment for recording but unfortunately that wasn’t possible. However, all things considered, I think we achieved quite an interesting, somewhat post-modern sounding, result. I think the main takeaway for me is that podcasting truly has a lot of creative potential which I have previously not considered, at least from the perspective of production.

Reflection Thomas

Taking from what we have learned from Unit 6, this podcasting assignment was an interesting execuntional project which required us to come up with our very own project, all from scratch. If before we had certain ideas about the editing and structuring of the conversation within a podcast, the complete freedom that was given to us came with certain challenging procedures. I'd like to first address the script. This was a hard part as our aim was to create something unique but at the same time relevant with what we have been discussing in this course and not only was it hard to achieve that but the 7-10 min range, which seemed a lot in the beginning, turned out to go by very fast as our engagement with the podcast could have probably carried on for a lot more. We were able to write a script that included certain features of a podcast like the commercial and the music which would connect in their own ways to the content material we had to address. In addition we did go through certain technical issues as recording remotely did not allow us to use a common microphone. This is where the editing part came in the picture but fortunately, given Unit 6, we were able to adjust and make sure that the recordings were rematched to follow the conversation. One main learning outcome, which was also mentioned in the Unit 6 podcast recordings, is to always have spare and extra saved pieces. “One is none, two is one”. We did in fact have multiple files to work with in case some would result in being damaged or lost.

Moreover the addition of music (intro, outro) allowed us even more to transition into the discussion part. Overall it was fun but challenging and I believe the work that both Kat and I put reflects a well rounded and original piece of podcast.
