
Take-Home Exam 

Kat Golubev 

11766190 

24.03.2021  

The Five Senses of Cinema 

Dr. Tarja Laine  

1096 words

Kat Golubev  
Professor Laine  
The Five Senses of Cinema 
24 March 2021

Take-Home Exam

1. Hapticity, or the ‘haptic’ coined by Alois Riegl and expanded upon by Marks and Beugnet, is a concept which enables discourse on the tactile, rather than the optic, mode of visual perception. The concept foregrounds cinematic materiality and describes the image ‘touching’ the eye, collapsing perspective into texture (Beugnet 66). The interiors in Bong Joon-ho’s Parasite (2019) are characterized by glass screens, through which events are often observed throughout the first half of the film (eg. man pissing on the sidewalk, the family’s spacious glass walls, Mr. Park’s office). However, when the former housekeeper Gook Moon-gwang, returning for her husband, steps into the basement, fully immersing into the black abyss of the doorway, she steps as if into the iris, disappearing behind the glassy surface and triggering one’s own awareness of the visual organ’s coating and structure through a sensuous encounter which simultaneously contextualizes and brings attention to the texturality which preceded it. The slow-motion effect on scenes in which two or more objects converged (eg. peach fuzz and skin, hot sauce and napkin, knife and torso) allowed the eye more time to ‘graze’ the textures, following their movements through space, exponentially emphasizing the haptic significance of impact. In Claire Denis’ Beau Travail (1999), the use of water imagery invigorates the eye, intermittently acting as a visual palate cleanser. Death is thus posited as a ‘dehydration’ with Sentain’s salt-encrusted body appearing in sharp contrast to the bodies’ previous supple reliefs, texturally invoking a process of decay.
    
2. Affect, as it pertains to the affective turn in media theory, is a concept which attempts to describe the impact of audiovisuality through its directness, proximity and emphasis on the ‘real’, that which is beyond linguistic models of meaning. In Spinoza’s terms, ‘affect’ is related to ‘first-order ideas’ which in film serve to immerse the spectator through invoking a “unity of the sensing and the sensed” (Deleuze 34), appealing to the bodily and autonomous rather than the narrative (Koivunen 91). In Lars von Trier’s The Idiots (1996) spassing remains an ambiguous act, both performative and authentic, meaningless yet cathartic. The close-ups on Karen spassing in the pool, while being caressed, kissed and mirrored by two other ‘idiots’ and Josephine spassing while having sex with Jeppe immerse the spectator into the visceral ambiguity of spassing as well as the other idiots’ bodies engagement, leading the viewer from a “psychic to social” (Koivunen 91) engagement with the film . The ‘realism’ achieved through the Dogme95 limitations consistently invite the viewer to participate in the film through the director’s and camera’s bodies, giving a sense of documenting it, changing perspectives and emphasizing sensations at will. Just like the ‘idiots’ with their ever-changing system of values and significations, the spectator is given a sense of freedom from oppressive systems through immersion into the film-world. By contrast, in David Mackenzie’s Perfect Sense (2011) affective immersion is achieved through handicapping the spectator along the trajectory of the disease’s progression, changing images and sounds (or lack thereof) with the loss of each sense, culminating with the loss of sight which draws the film to a close and releasing the spectator back into the life-world.

3. The concept of ‘the gaze’, originating in Lacanian theory of ‘the other’ and adapted to psychoanalytic film theory by Christian Metz and Jean-Louis Baudry, denotes the formation of power relations and the spectators’ identification with the film’s ideology through the ‘act of looking’ which is enacted through the cinematic image (Sturken and Cartwright 105). In Elja-Liisa Ahtila’s House (2002) the gaze is formulated by following the fragmentation of the character’s subjectivity with the spatial fluidity of the image initially being determined according to the character’s narration and then relegated to the inhuman gaze of the inanimate objects which penetrate the character’s psyche. Demonstrating the selective psychic perception by stepping behind the curtain to exert control over her own line of vision and ‘looking at’ her own self while she sits at the sewing machine as her subjectivity splits, the film depicts frenetic attempts at organizing perception. By eventually covering the window completely, the character and the film reject the objective and rational promise of vision and knowledge. In Bong Joon-ho’s Parasite (2019), the film focuses on hands as the site of power, emphasizing ‘having’ and ‘doing’ as crucial in exerting agency in the film-world. The close-up of hands when Kevin begins tutoring Da-hye, when Madame counts money, when Kevin holds the wealth stone, and when Mr. Kim writhes his bloody hands in the basement all serve to invite the spectator into viewing the narrative’s events as ‘acts’ which attempt to destabilize or enforce hierarchies of power. The film’s separation into levels is also used to order the ‘looking’ experience, always orienting the spectator according to its ‘depth’, a spectrum of class invoked through emphasis on vertical movement and long-shots of stairs which scale from the top of society (the Parks’ family home) to the bottom (the Kims’ family home) while also revealing the ethical rotting at the top through the suspended space of the Parks’ home basement, like a cavity in a tooth .

4. Abjection is a concept theorized by Julia Kristeva to explain the ways in which horror forces the spectator to confront ‘corporeal reality’, triggering a sense of the disintegration of the integrity and unity of the body, often expressed through the feeling of disgust (Barker 55) . In Bong Joon-ho’s Parasite (2019) when the family is drinking in the Park’s family living room, before the film enters its ‘horror stage’, Mr Kim lunges at his wife Chung-sook, grabbing her by the collar in what seems to be a fit of rage. Chung-sook’s body makes no attempts to protect itself, her motionless torso and blank stare under the threat of violence implying a stark lifelessness. It is not until she begins to laugh and the scene is revealed to be humorous rather than disgusting that the spectator is released from this paralyzed and disembodied image of the body. The clothes in Claire Denis’ Beau Travail (1999) code the identities of the Legionnaires and civilians, men and women. Thus, when the Legionnaires' uniforms are ‘cast off’ and shown separate from the bodies, hanging on a drying line or being ironed, the spectator experiences the loss of integrity through absence and the separation of the Legionnaires from their ‘skin’ and selves. In Elja-Liisa Ahtila’s House (2002), the house is introduced via voice-over as a unified entity whose boundaries begin to deteriorate along with the character’s mental state, inanimate objects are framed as though foreign and external forces begin to invade through its ‘orifices’, as with the cow materializing and penetrating the house through the screen, causing a collapse of cognitive and material boundaries.

Works Cited

Barker, Jennifer M. "Skin." The Tactile Eye: Touch and the Cinematic Experience. Berkeley, CA: U of California, 2009. 23-68. Print.

Beugnet, Martine. "The Aesthetics of Sensation." Cinema and Sensation: French Film and the Art of Transgression. Edinburgh UP, 2007. 63-124. Print.

Deleuze, Gilles, and Daniel W. Smith. Francis Bacon the Logic of Sensation. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2017. Print.

Koivunen, Anu. "Force of Affects, Weight of Histories in Love Is a Treasure." Carnal Aesthetics: Transgressive Imagery and Feminist Politics. By Bettina Papenburg and Marta Zarzycka. London: I.B. Tauris, 2012. 89-101. Print.

Sturken, Marita, and Lisa Cartwright. "Modernity: Spectatorship, Power, and Knowledge." Practices of Looking: An Introduction to Visual Culture. New York: Oxford UP, 2009. 93-139. Print.

I declare that I have understood and followed ethical standards of behavior in accordance with the University of Amsterdam’s regulations on plagiarism and fraud: https://student.uva.nl/en/content/az/plagiarism-and-fraud/plagiarism-and-fraud.html. I have taken this exam to the best of my own abilities, without seeking or accepting the help of any source that is not explicitly allowed by the conditions of this exam.
