Kat Golubev (11766190) 
The Sublime  
Dr. Katia Hay

Part I

Final Exam

b)Why does Kant say that the sublime belongs to the mind only?

Kant states that sublimity, unlike beauty, belongs to the mind only because objects that provoke the feeling of the sublime do so by being incompatible with our faculty of presentation. Thus they are “counter-purposive” (§ 23), assaulting the imagination as opposed to pleasing it in the way beauty does. Sublimity, therefore, cannot be a property of the object; the object itself, in the case of the sublime, is not pleasurable as it exposes the limitations of the faculties which are used to contemplate the beautiful thereby leading the subject to the employment of reason in order to attain the “negative pleasure” (§23) which Kant attributes to the experience.

Whereas beauty leads to a sense of purposiveness in nature itself, ideas of the sublime are incited by nature’s formlessness to the extent that it can excite ideas of said limitlessness. Thus, there is no tangible object to which we can attribute ‘the sublime’ as a quality because it is only unified as such through reason and not in any given form of nature itself.

Furthermore, Kant characterizes the sublime as that which is “absolutely great”(§25), an idea which can only be reached in the mind. This is because any magnitude of nature experienced through the senses is always subject to comparison, precluding it from achieving the totality which reason necessitates. Thus, the concept of the sublime can only be reached through reason’s transcendence beyond the limits of sensibility and imagination, meaning that the mind’s contemplation is not directed at an object but rather focused on itself and through this becomes “elevated in its own judgement of itself” (§26) and its ability to surpass “every standard of the senses” (§25).

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the experience of the sublime, for Kant, lies in the mind’s emancipation from nature and the discovery of its own vocation thereby sparing humanity the humiliation of submitting to nature fully by asserting its superiority through reason which is beyond the sensible and natural world (§28). In order for this to be posited as the purposive nature of the sublime experience, a purposiveness that is distinct to that of ‘the beautiful’ while remaining universal, it must be determined solely by the movement of the mind which characterizes it, with nature only serving the experience insofar as it “summons our power”(§28) to make the judgement in the first place.

c) In the last section of his essay What is Postmodernism?, Lyotard distinguishes between two forms of presenting the un-presentable, one that is nostalgic, one that is joyful. In which ways does this distinction echo Kant’s analytic of the sublime?

Lyotard makes the distinction between the two modes thus: the nostalgic mode is focused on the pain of the inadequacy of our faculty of presentation whereas the joyful mode brings the power of the subject’s ability to conceive the un-presentable to the forefront. In the nostalgic mode the subject is consoled by recognizable form, leaving the unpresentable as the “missing contents” (p. 81) which cannot be expressed through them and provoking pain caused by longing and powerlessness. The joyous mode, in Lyotard’s words causes an ‘increase in being’ through reason surpassing, and delighting in its superiority, over sensibility and the faculty of the imagination. This distinction between the two modes strongly echoes the ‘Analytic of the Sublime’, characterizing the two poles between which the mind moves. According to Kant, the sublime is caused by an initial “check to the vital forces” which is then “followed at once by a discharge more powerful”(§ 23), tying the two modes of the sublime together chronologically, the first confronting the subject with their inadequacy and, by extension, their mortality in a similar way to the nostalgic mode, while the latter frees the subject through the power of their own mind as demonstrated in the joyful mode. Kant refers to the sublime as a “negative pleasure” (§ 23), but states that it is undeniably a pleasure nonetheless which supports Lyotard’s conclusion that the nostalgic mode cannot be considered a truly sublime experience because it lacks the mind’s emancipation from form and the joyousness of recognizing the ability to conceive of such “inhumanity” (p. 81). For Kant the pleasure of the sublime is derived from the initial pain caused by the form, or lack thereof, doing “violence, as it were, to the imagination” (§ 23). Lyotard also recognizes the need for this link to remain intact and argues that postmodernism should reject the “solace of good forms” (p.81) in order to focus on finding new ways to “impart a stronger sense of the unpresentable” (p.81).

Furthermore, parallels can be drawn between Lyotard’s two modes and Kant’s distinction between the mathematically and dynamically sublime. The nostalgic mode, despite it being imbued with artistic prowess, alludes to the unpresentable through forms which can be grasped by the faculty of the imagination. Similarly, the mathematically sublime attempts to reach the concept of the ‘absolutely great’ through comparative measures meaning that it remains tied to something outside of itself which, for Kant, does not constitute the same experience of limitlessness as the one achieved through aesthetic apprehension. The dynamically sublime, as well as Lyotard’s joyous mode, specifically rely on form overwhelming the senses and the inability to grasp the unpresentable through the imagination, forcing the mind to defer to reason and thus acknowledging its own independence.

Part II

d) Read and comment the following passage (use questions below as guidance for commentary)

But in what we are wont to call sublime in nature there is such an absence of anything leading to particular objective principles and corresponding forms of nature, that it is rather in its chaos, or in its wildest and most irregular disorder and desolation, provided it gives signs of magnitude and power, that nature chiefly excites the ideas of the sublime. Hence we see that the concept of the sublime in nature is far less important and rich in consequences than that of its beauty. It gives on the whole no indication of anything purposive in nature itself, but only in the possible employment of our intuitions of it in inducing a feeling in our own selves of a purposiveness quite independent of nature.

Kant’s Analytic of the Beautiful is closely related to the Analytic of the Sublime. Yet, the latter brings with it many new concepts and ideas which are not present in the former, strongly distinguishing the two judgements. The passage above is located in the tail end of §23 following an analysis of the similarities between the two concepts but serves to introduce the core differences between the two and lays the conceptual framework for the concept of the sublime. This passage contributes to Kant’s justification of studying the experience of the sublime independently and is meant to demonstrate the differences between the sublime and the beautiful in order to warrant such an inquiry.

The first sentence of the passage serves to describe that which can induce the feeling of the sublime and draw a distinction between the different roles that form plays in the beautiful and in the sublime as they are experienced in nature. As opposed to the beautiful, the sublime does not emerge from an understanding between reason and the senses, but rather relies on their discord. So whereas beauty is determined through the apprehension and comprehension of form, the sublime is provoked in the subject by the absence of form. In other words, it is the formlessness of nature, referred in this passage as ‘its chaos’, which denies the subject the opportunity to reach an agreement between the faculty of reason and the faculty of imagination which spurs the mind into motion.

The terminology used by Kant in this passage, such as ‘chaos’, ‘disorder’ and ‘desolation’ are also used to highlight a necessary aspect of the sublime, namely its terror which induces, at first, a feeling of powerlessness which is then overcome by reason’s ability to grasp the limitless while the senses and the imagination fall short. While, according to Kant, the subject should not feel themselves directly in the way of danger, this passage does insist that the sublime is nevertheless caused by the sight of nature’s display of ‘magnitude and power’, a ‘might’ which is fearful and commanding of respect in a similar way to the concept of ‘God’ .

Thus, nature’s formlessness, in respect to the sublime, is not benign but rather presents itself as a challenge to the subject, one which can only be overcome through reason.

Upon first reading the passage, I assumed that Kant meant that the concept of the sublime in nature was both less important and less rich in consequences than beauty. This is because of Kant’s emphasis on the ‘objective principles’ of form which can be derived from the judgement of beauty in nature and subsequently used to view nature through the lens of art. This interpretation is further supported by the qualification of the ‘sublime in nature’ which precedes the judgement of its consequences and importance as well as the following sentence in which Kant states that the feeling of the sublime can only lead the subject to discerning their own ‘purposiveness quite independent of nature’. Thus, in this passage Kant makes the point that ‘the sublime’ carries less consequences in regards to nature than ‘the beautiful’ because it does not allow for any object of nature to be referred to as purposively sublime in itself. However, it can be argued that the sublime is richer in consequences than beauty in terms of the power of the mind and the faculty of reason. The beautiful is pleasurable because of the ‘disinterested contemplation’ and ‘understanding’ of a purposiveness which it brings forth but it does not lead the mind to a state of transcendence. The sublime, on the other hand, does exactly that. Therefore, the sublime, while being non-consequential for any form or object of nature, remains highly consequential for the mind in regards to establishing the mind’s vocation and its ability to experience limitlessness, leading to the realization of reason as superior and unbound to nature.

The main point of the passage is to draw the distinction between the different types of purposiveness encountered in the beautiful and the sublime. ’The beautiful’ emerges from a purposiveness without a concept meaning that the form of the object of nature which is judged to be beautiful seems to be imbued with a certain intent, reason or point but lacks a determinate concept to match this intuition. ‘The sublime’ does not share this particular type of purposiveness. The passage describes objects which inspire feelings of the sublime as chaotic, wild and ‘irregular’ which, seemingly, not only rejects their potential purposiveness but establishes them as ‘counter-purposive’ in regards to their form, irreconcilable with the faculty of the imagination, and incompatible with the senses. The sublime, therefore, must waiver its reliance on form in order to posit a purposiveness that delineates from that of ‘the beautiful’ , one that is determined by the mind’s autonomy ’independent of nature’: the purposiveness of reason itself. In other words, ‘the beautiful’ is form searching for a fitting concept through the contemplation of the sensible and presentable; meanwhile, the sublime is a concept which cannot be contained in form and can only be grasped by reason. This distinction is made evident in the passage, relocating the purposiveness of the sublime firmly to the mind and describing the qualities of nature which may give rise to it but, at the same time, may not be termed sublime themselves.
