[tiktok - the implications of sound.md](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/23401889/tiktok.-.the.implications.of.sound.md)
Kat Golubev  
11766190  
Philosophy of the Humanities 
Final Essay

TikTok  
The Implications of Sound

I. Introduction

TikTok is a video-sharing social networking platform which is best known for its dance, lip-sync and comedy videos. TikTok encompasses within itself the filming, editing and sharing of video content, while a user has the option to upload any video directly (max. 1 min. duration), it is customary for most of the creative process to happen on the application itself. Like any widespread social media technology, the affordances of the platform guide and restructure the psycho-social digital space the effects of which often transcend the confines of the platform. MySpace and Facebook developed the ‘profile’ and the ‘social circle’, Instagram aestheticized the mundane, and Twitter reimagined public discourse. As such, TikTok is indebted to its predecessors in terms of affordances such as followers, comments, and personal profiles yet significantly diverges from these platforms in terms of its organizing principle: the logic of montage. Within these logics, TikTok’s most significant contribution lies in its separation of audio and video as discrete elements and its use of audio soundbites as memetic elements which are searchable, reusable and re-mixable. The sound of every video uploaded to TikTok is available on its own for other users to use and functions as a hashtag in terms of searchability by grouping together all the videos which use the same sound. While TikTok is not connected to any musical services, soundbites and audio clips can be uploaded directly to the platform, resulting in short music clips and remixes of popular sounds circulating the platform. Because of this feature, TikTok sub-cultures and ‘trends’,which are best described as miniature genres of videos replicated or remade by different users, are formed predominantly through auditory repetition, making TikTok somewhat of a soundscape to which users continuously contribute. TikTok sounds are often referenced offline by those ‘in-the-know’ and can be described as cultivating a new type of audio culture which indiscriminately combines elements of music and speech.

Tik Tok’s affordances which encourage both creative and formulaic expressions in its users place it at an intersection of entertainment and communication in a way that is reminiscent of the historical avant-garde(Ranciere 2010) . While the avant-garde movements did not have a concrete political agenda, they were nevertheless political in nature. As such, this emerging culture is important to analyze through a variety of lenses in order to gain an understanding of its possibilities and limitations as well as to assess the significance of this reconstruction of sound as a wider phenomenon.

I will be analyzing to what extent TikTok’s audio infrastructure constructs a virtual parliament around matters of concern in accordance with Latour’s Dingpolitik as well as its relation to the construction of cyborg identities. For me, the question lies not only in the assembly logics of TikTok but also to what ends these assemblies serve, if any.

By defining ‘the political’ through the perspective of the historical avant-garde (Ranciere 2010) rather than state-operated structures of power, I aim to integrate the aesthetics and politics of TikTok in accordance with its artistic practices rather than its goals. Then, I intend to discern the extent to which these practices align with Bruno Latour’s vision of Dingpolitik with the soundbites as the ‘matters of concern’. Finally, I will discuss the emergent character and charge of the platform through Donna Harraway’s conception of the cyborg identity and the implications of a transient voice.

TikTok is by far the most artistic social media platform and therefore resides at a unique intersection between aesthetics and politics. With its capacity for both communication and expression, it is significant as an object of philosophical and socio-cultural inquiry. By focusing on the platform’s relationship with sound, I attempt to contribute an updated vision of rhetoric as both an operational and sensorial object.

II. Subject

As described in the introduction, Tiktok is unique in terms of its use of sound as a structural element of the platform as well as its cultivation of algorithmically manufactured sub-cultures around those sounds. Its constantly expanding sound library is contained within the platform and accessible to every user as a foundational building block for content which largely informs the overall ‘style’ of the finished product. Therefore, despite the fact that many soundbites were created outside the platform, they can be considered TikTok native because of the particular processes of popularization and adaptation which they undergo. Artistically, it is most reminiscent of sampling which is one of the defining elements of digital music production but its application is cinematic in regards to synchronization with visual elements.

TikTok audios can also directly generate content by affecting events or guiding actions in real-time which are usually filmed and uploaded as content. For example, there are audios imitating suggestive facetime calls which users play in front of their significant others to see their reactions, there are soundbites which confess particular feelings that the user wants to express but can’t bring themselves to say, there are audio guides for party games such as ‘never have I ever’, and so on and so forth.

Furthermore, TikTok’s audios function as meta-discursive elements which are useful in determining individual affiliations as well as discerning the extent of the algorithm’s power. To
put this into context, TikTok famously has an extremely agile and adaptable algorithm which works to show users videos that they are more likely to enjoy. As a result, TikTok’s user base has fragmented into various subcultures (‘straight TikTok’, ‘alt-TikTok’, ‘DeepTok’, etc) which exist within their own algorithmically constructed filter bubbles. While filter bubbles have been a point of interest, and tension, for a while, most prominently during the 2016 USA election which leveraged the insulated online experience for political power, they have been notoriously difficult to pinpoint. On TikTok, however, there are specific audios which play a collection of soundbites from particular TikTok communities so that users can test themselves or others on their awareness of these trends. These challenge videos are also consumed as content but they are significant in highlighting the deep rift in the online experiences of people on the same platform.

In The Codified World, Flusser (2002) argued that society was moving away from a linguistic and historical interpretation of experience and returning to an image-based understanding of our surroundings, encoded through digital technologies. However, the oversaturation of imagery as well as the postmodern digital practices of its manipulation have made it increasingly difficult to extrapolate any stable meaning at all. I would argue that because of the inability to rely on images as representations of a tangible reality or ‘truth’, sound emerges as a more accessible and unifying way to interpret the lived experience.

Music is widely considered the most direct art form because of its inextricable relationship with time and visceral impression on the listener. Unlike visual or textual mediums which can be broken down to more basic elements with relative ease (colors, letters, etc), the frequencies of sounds fuse together, the whole irreducible to the sum of its parts.  
Music and culture have always moved in tandem. ...Along with rhetoric, understood as a particular style of speech encompassing both form and content, which has historically been employed as a political vehicle and subsequently filtered down to the masses to reflect dominant notions, ideas, or attitudes of a given time. From the beginning of rhythm and storytelling, auditory experiences have brought people together, whether that be in the context of Woodstock or Hitler’s rallies. Mass communications began with the radio.

In my view, the use of audio samples as the central core of a platform such as TikTok signals a shift towards ‘emotive and/or empathic thinking’, utilizing the evocative qualities of tone, pitch, frequency and volume in order to relay a ‘truth’ that is more subjective and personal than that of the image or the written word.

III. Concepts

Latour’s Dingpolitik outlines a vision of an object-oriented democracy which embraces the complexity of matters-of-concern rather than the illusory transparency of matters-of-fact. According to Latour, objects are issues which exist simultaneously as representatives and representations, thereby capable of reorganizing the public space to allow for political arrangements which are motivated by concern about the objects in question. Within these arrangements, both disagreements and agreements are limited to the particular object in question, going issue by issue instead of adhering to an overarching political agenda. Objects amplify matters of concern by unifying the two representational aspects, allowing for the ideas and interests of the people to be more directed by acknowledging the concerns which bind them to the objects. By letting go of the fanatical preoccupation with matters-of-fact, which Latour refers to as fundamentalism, Dingpolitik allows for more nuanced and sincere political engagement and assembly which does not try to eradicate uncertainty, weaknesses and passions from the political process and utilizes various prostheses in the interest of expressing one’s concerns. Object-oriented assembly therefore requires letting go of the idea of a singular political body or state in favor of a far more ephemeral conception to which Latour refers as the phantom public. It is through this decentralized and fragmented yet highly networked democratic process that politics can free itself from the ‘succession of time’ and enter the ‘time of space’.

While Latour focuses on the political entanglement between people and things which nevertheless keeps the separation between the two intact, Donna Harraway’s ​Cyborg Manifesto (1985) aims to break down the boundaries between human and non-human in order to craft a political identity that is free from notions such as race, sex and class. Rather than assembling around matters of concern, Harraway (1985)proposes the idea of affinity politics which are not guided by natural predispositions but rather constitute a consciously chosen kinship as a facet of the cyborg identity. As opposed to giving way to passions and weaknesses, Harraway (1985) argues for irony as a political and rhetorical method which she describes as being about “humour and serious play”(Harraway 1985).

The juxtaposition of Harraway (1985) and Latour’s theories bring forth two widely differing interpretations of political assembly. Whereas Latour sees political assembly as a spatial relation between cohabiting things and people, Harraway (1985) incorporates non-human entities into the self in order to transcend political divisions.


IV. Analysis

While TikTok was not envisioned to serve as a site of political assembly, the blurring of the boundaries between art and life puts the autonomy of both at risk and therefore acquires an inherently political character as an extension of the historical avant-garde(Burger 1984). The integration of artistic practices into everyday routine and the expression of the self through these practices conflicts with the protection extended to art by virtue of its detachment. While avant-garde movements are generally remembered for their absurdist and seemingly chaotic contributions which have now been inducted into the artistic tradition, their legacy is also one of participatory and methodical madness which can be clearly seen, for example, in Dadaist guides for writing poetry. Similarly, TikTok audio trends function as protocols for expressions which can be either adapted or subverted by virtue of the expectations which they set-up. TikTok trends have created sets of recognizable aesthetics which nevertheless remain inextricable from TikTok as a collective creative force, largely negating the idea of individual production; a digital commune of sorts acting as a multi-layered ‘seismograph of its time’.

On a macro-level, the assembly of users around particular soundbites can be viewed as a virtual parliament in accordance with Latour’s ‘matters of concern’. The audio’s resonance with a group of individual users and their engagement and amplification of the soundbite creates a diverse and multifaceted body of work based on a singular soundbite. In his explanation of Dingpolitik, Latour states that there is “a hidden continuity and a hidden coherence in what we are attached to”(Latour 2005, p 2). The virtual parliaments created through TikTok’s audio have several different schema of interplay between the audio and visual elements. In some cases, such as straightforward dance or lip syncing videos the attachment to the object (song or speech) stands. However, in many cases the audios do not reveal ‘what’ we are attached to but rather ‘in what way’ we are attached to any given topos. The soundbites are not neutral, each one has a particular tone and the employment of music and/or speech in this way carries with it a multiplicity of meanings which are used to express opinions and/or concerns about issues beyond themselves. This is dependent on the dynamic which audio and video elements acquire. The user’s individual contribution (visual and/or textual) often acts as the premise, while the audio, which remains the same, is the conclusion or punchline. This relationship is transferable to anything, meaning that a myriad of ‘matters of concern’ can be assembled and organized through the particular way in which that concern is expressed. The platform constitutes a shared space in which “everything has become contemporary” (Latour 2005, p11 ).The virtual parliament of TikTok trends contains within itself “time as a “series of succes- sions”” (Latour, 2005, p 13)set to an aural loop as well as “space as a “series of simultaneities””(Latour 2005, p 13 )in which all relevant videos appear at once.

TikTok’s audio infrastructure objectifies rhetoric itself and in doing so it fulfills the role of the parasthese through which a user overcomes their disability of self-expression more so than it constitutes a ‘matter of concern’. Therefore, depending on their context, the sounds may be “the ​res ​that creates a ​public ​around it” (Latour 2005, p 7)but they are not necessarily that. Despite this inconsistency, the assembly around sounds on TikTok fulfills most of Latour’s conditions for the existence of Dingpolitik.

Additionally, in many instances the use of TikTok is in line with Latour’s facetious call to “compare mere ​assertions ​with one another” (Latour 2005, p 9 )through a competitive element of utilizing the sound to its highest potential. The participation in a ‘trend’ signals its relevance to the user personally and functions to bring more attention to the assertion while the popularity which is facilitated and aggregated via the platform’s algorithmic logic can be viewed as the approval rating of the assertion made. This process is highly subjective and insulated with the video only appearing to those who could potentially be concerned and completely bypassing others. The algorithmic logics constitute a kind of “assembly of assemblies”(Latour 2005, p 10 ) in which many discourses happen simultaneously yet do not intersect one another. Therefore the virtual parliament of TikTok trends algorithmically ensures disassembly as well as assembly. The audio affordances of TikTok can righteously be considered “an eloquence much more indirect, distorted, inconclusive”(Latour 2005, p 1 ), perhaps more so than Latour could’ve ever imagined. By divorcing each sound from its larger context, making it specific enough to make a point while simultaneously remaining nebulous in terms of what it could be referring to, the soundbite functions as a mediator which can be used tactically in order to express a thought but also runs the risk of the attributing intent even in cases where it was wholly absent.

Parliament, which as Latour notes “ is a technical term for “making things public” (Latour 2005, p 4)among many other forms of producing voices and connections among people” fits the audio infrastructure of the platform without any friction yet fails to fully account for the processes which occur on the micro-level.

Despite the fact that, structurally, TikTok’s audio search, trends, and algorithmic gatekeeping fit quite smoothly into the description of Dingpolitik, there is one major contention. Latour makes the claim that “we might be more connected to each other by our worries, our matters of concern, the issues we care for, than by any other set of values, opinions, attitudes or principles”(Latour 2005, p 5) and while I have acknowledged that soundbites can be used as prosthetic means for expression, I am not convinced that ‘matters of concern’ are an accurate description of individual intention for engaging in the collective, avant-gardist audiovisual practices of TikTok. Therefore, in order to analyze TikTok on a micro-individual level, the concept of Donna Harraway’s “cyborg identity” (1985) seems far more relevant. While I would argue that all of TikTok’s creative affordances (such as backgrounds, filters, effects, etc) aid in the construction of a cyborg identity in both a personal and collective sense, it is the utilization of audio as an effortlessly transferable element which is perhaps the platform’s most significant contribution. In terms of its political efficacy, this affordance actively subverts the notion of the ‘voice’,which is often used to denote civil engagement as well as being a common marker of identity. The ability to embody a voice which is not yours through lip syncing or other interpretive means, thoroughly reassembles the construction of self and can be used to call into question the political identity that was thrust upon you. Furthermore, the juxtaposition of the audio and visual elements create ample opportunity for irony, far more than for a sincere expression of one’s matter of concern. In addition, the intentional arrangement of audiovisual elements within a video is far closer to Harraway’s (1985) description of affinity politics because of the hyper-conscious act of filming, editing and posting. As such, the content which an individual shares constructs the self according to their own fantasy, freed from their corporeal reality through technological tools. The voice is generally regarded as an almost inextricable, individual and biologically determined factor which means that sharing it amongst a collective or distorting it maintains its political effect by destabilizing sedimented worldviews through the perception of identity in terms of its form more so than its content. Walter Benjamin (1969)wrote at length about the revolutionary potential of film due to its loss of aura, i.e the lack of an original, which according to him radically democratized the artistic medium. TikTok seems to be a direct extension of his ideas, democratizing not only the medium but also emphasizing the accessibility to both human and non-human expressions of the self in accordance to one’s desires.

V. Conclusion

Overall, TikTok’s audio infrastructure can be understood through Latour’s object-oriented democracy as a virtual parliament on a macro-scale in terms of the cohabitation of various matters of concern within a single space with the ability to assemble and disassemble through the participatory and algorithmic logics of the platform. However, when analyzing the platform through the dynamic between the aural affordances and individual users, Donna Harraway’s
(1985) concept of the assemblage of a cyborg identity as well as the irony pervasive in that identity seems to align more closely with the avant-gardist practices associated with TikTok.

The emergence of sound as a central organizing principle of the platform is significant both technologically and psychologically. While we are mostly accustomed to expressing ourselves through the linguistic content of our speech, the isolation of sound as a discrete and transferable element has the potential to reconstruct the ways in which we perceive and employ its formal qualities outside of music, possibly leading to more experimental forms of communication.

TikTok has many more qualities which can be researched and analyzed. I think that the visual affordances and the aesthetics developed by different sub-cultures on the platform will be defining for quite some time to come.


Bibliography

Benjamin, Walter. 1969. “​The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction”  
.Bürger Peter. 1984. ​Theory of the Avant-Garde​. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press

Flusser, V. and Ströhl, A., 2002. Writings.​ Minneapolis (Minn.): University of Minnesota Press.35-41  
Harraway, Donna. 1985. “Cyborg Manifesto”  
Latour, Bruno. 2005. “From Realpolitik to Dingpolitik-An Introduction to Making Things Public.”

Rancière, Jacques, and Steve Corcoran. 2010. ​Dissensus: on Politics and Aesthetics
